# Welcome to LOCAL's Intoduction to Referee 101
`For Andrew`
This is a crash course on how I've refined my Referee/Keeper/Dungeon Master skillset over the years.

## 1. Know Yourself 
There is no game unless you are having fun, and this will be true for everyone on session night. If anything feels lame, monotonous, or generally bogus while you are writing, then your players will feel it too. When I sit down to write TTRPG sessions, I usually tend to lose myself in it for 2-4 hours. Usually, after the first hour or so, if it feels like I am either lost in the details of a math equation OR writing a puppet show that my audience will interact with like a group of schoolchildren. The puppet show is a good sign, and the math equation means you should just move on to something else in the story. Another important thing to note early on is, how long do you want to hang out with these people. I consider 1 hour to be a "try-out" of a TTRPG, 2 hours to be a minimum for anything to actually occur in the story, 3 hours is short, 4 is standard, 5 is standard, 6 is respected, 7 is honorable, and 8+ is a valid, true, bona-fide play session, and they all require a different kind of preparation. How fast are you going to get sick of these people? How fast are you going to get tired of performing stand-up to your peers? I know you want to think about having a years-long campaign with people, but the first adventure should always be treated as a one-shot until proven otherwise.

## 2. Guessing Playertypes
One of the most important pieces of prepwork you can do, in my opinion, is think about your playerbase. Here are some archetypes that you should consider:
- **Skyrim Player.** This is a very common type of first-time player. They will be entirely mentally locked on the fact that this is a 1-to-1 rendition of Skyrim played entirely in our imaginations. You can tell a Skyrim player well off by their most common question, *"Well what can I do?"*, which will most likely be asked by them 5-20 times minimum before they realize that, unlike Skyrim, they can choose to do things like smash a potion on their heads. It feels like for a short time they are unable to move without realizing they don't need to hold a controller. This is normal. Have their character in a situation where they can't get out until they speak or think their way out; no violence, magic, or sneaking works best.
- **Violence-Suppressed.** This player, no matter how soft they seem in daily life, turns into a blood-thirsty maniac when consequences no longer apply to them in real life. This is where we get the common Dungeons & Dragons name of "murder-hobo", known to kill entire towns of people and never pay any money for the inn. These kinds of players are hard to deal with in city limits but often keep the pace of combat going in encounters and also prove to keep the party alive more often than not. The good thing for these players is to give them an encounter early and probably also mention the fact that guards are around in city limits and will put them through a long and lengthy trial process. These players often respond to the threat of being bored and not being able to turn almost immediately to violence.
- **Reverse-Day Celebrator.** This player has a personal goal to test the limits of the game, and therefore everything that you've spent time making for the game. If you say the wizard wants to meet them at the inn, they will go directly to the town center. If you tell them their quest lies at the end of the East road, they will turn directly towards the nearest treeline and make a bolt for it. These players treat your fun game night like they are the newest contestant on the Truman Show. You will write a vast city with a 2,000 foot cliff to the West, so you've spent an hour constructing the map for everything that lies to the East. They will be scaling the face of the cliff within 25 minutes. The best way to deal with these players is to have a lot of tie-ins back to the main quest around the city. The first couple times they go off-script, point them back towards their story beat- make it feel unavoidable.
- **Gimmick Player.** This player is all about one thing. For my character Derrick, it was mud. Any time there was mud, I would cover myself in it. For my last game, a girl just made it her personal mission to keep smoking cat nip because she was "going to run out". It is best to just roll with the punches with these characters and just arbitrarily include these things in the night or tie it into the main mission somehow. My referee made the first dungeon at a graveyard that was really muddy. I made the original theives in the story steal half of her stash of catnip during the first encounter. As long as you throw them a bone or two, and give them a few minutes to roleplay fawning over their obsession, they are usually very fun players.
- **Side Quest Character.** This player has decided that their character has a personal quest that they must complete. Often, it has to deal with their dead parents. This is a little more dangerous than the gimmick player, because their obsession often requires that a side-quest be written to complete it, and that they often try to edge their story into nearly every conversation they have with an NPC. Gimmick players usually mention it quickly ("hey, got any nip? No? Ok!") where side quest characters usually have a line of questioning ("hey, have you seen a sword? No? What about a dark-haired woman, No? What about this symbol. . . No?") that can make every conversation 10 minutes longer. It is best to wait a while to give them anything. Make it seem kind of useless to keep asking the same questions. Make it so the NPCs think it's kind of weird that you keep asking about it. At the very end of the game, at hopefully YOUR planned ending, tie in their backstory to it. Have them find that very symbol on one of the bodies of the people they killed. It may seem like you ignored them all night and then told them they can only have fun next time, but that's kind of the point. You wrote your adventure, not theirs. However, I often feel as though it makes them recontextualize their interactions and feel like they are "secretly right", which I think, combined with a fun night with their friends, makes for great fun. And now, you also have another idea for the next game night!
- **Referee Loyalist.** This is an absolute godsend of a player to have. Having one in your group is always amazing, but having 3 or 4 loyalists can turn the pressure up very quickly. an antithesis to the opposite-day celebrator, this player will respect the time you put into preparing the game and follow every story beat. They will immediately go to any location that is deemed necessary for the story, and they will urge others to make haste there as well. Often times, these are the players who will try to convince others not to split the party, which is absolutely imperitive to a beginner referee and beginner players. They will make you happy that you wrote so many story beats and locations, but the danger is, they will burn out your story much faster than the alloted playtime. You will find that, with more distractable players, your story may only need to take up about 30% of the time because they will spend nearly a full hour trying to guess what is "so important" about a barrel that you accidentally described too much (that is a real danger, btw). Four hours of writing for you could be a 10-hour game for distractable players with no loyalist and an hour and a half for a whole group of loyalists.
- **Sk8tr.** This represents a sort of "class clown" of character who will attempt to do a kickflip the first chance that they get. They will try to pull off impossibly (mostly athletic-based) moves, just to see what happens. A common move of this player is to perform at least one backflip while attempting something else, usually moving from one platform or ledge to another. Abdolutely let them attempt everything that they want to do, but also decide a number in your head for a difficulty class that is incredibly high, and the stakes were they to fail. Attempting to stop them in any way will immediately ruin how they perceive the game for the rest of the night. They will feel awesome if they succeed, and if they do, give it to them. Tell them everyone who saw was very impressed. If they fail, punish them. Taking a little damage is a good way to keep the batman moves to a minimum in between rests, and makes it feel that much better when they do complete it. Make them drop their coin purse and have it spill all over the ground. They are similar to `Gimmick Players`, but appear so often and have such a loose grasp on the concept that they belong in their own category.
- **Grognard.** Usually a fan of old war games, this is a roleplaying game traditionalist. If they are over 60 and have played tabletop games in the past, they are a `Grognard`. It is unlikely that you will get one of these, and it often crosses over with `Rules Lawyer`, but I do consider this to be pretty much a fundamental aspect of Josh. They will argue with you a lot over form. You should stress to them that this is a custom ruleset that you are using, and not that you are using the base TTRPG system incorrectly. That should quell many of the bad emotions they are currently experiencing. They are absolutely enslaved to any math present and will often argue with you over charts. Allow them to use any charts they find, but manipulate the math on your end if necessary.
- **Mystery Princess.** These can occur frequently in first-time players, and they will often never change. Fans of high-fantasy, royalty, mystery, and hearing themselves talk, these people are after dramatic, conversation-based plots that are mostly revealed without combat, and most always love when the villain is close to home, scooby-doo style. Often near-silent during combat, every one of these players encounters a silent fear that if they were to participate too much, word would get out, and their status may be ruined in some form of higher social circle (but rarely do they know this yet). Often more focused on spells, a dead giveaway is the *Make Friends* spell, as they are certain they will want to talk information or a deal out of somebody later. This is the thematic opposite of our `Violence-Supressed` Murder-hobo archetype. They are bogged down by constant combat and will feel like they aren't part of the game as the honor-bound characters finish off a room of monsters. Make sure they have access to fine, expensive clothing. Make sure they talk to a noble, royalty, or anyone who can bestow upon them some sort of status. Usually, this can turn them into people who will kill for a reason (societal gain). Try to have a secret be revealed in front of a group of people. Talk to them in a voice. You should essentially make a roll off each of their quips, instead of chunking up the conversation like `The Umm-I`.
- **Fairy Girlfriend.** Almost always the girlfriend of someone who asked if she could come, this girl really wants to come hang out and make comments with her boyfriend's friends, but she will not care much about learning or interacting with the game. Most of all, she will want to say things about the game, and she will want to feel like she is helpful without feeling like the pace of the game is at all reliant on her. To be completely frank, I usually make this person a fairy, but to be quite honest, it has always been a woman in this archetype so far. The purpose of the fairy is that many aspects of movement difficulty are negated by flight, that their small size makes them incredibly hard to hit AND also makes them a poor choice to carry things, like heavy objects or cumbersome inventory. Mentally, this player does not believe that they can carry heavy items, but flying up to hard to reach spaces and grabbing a key, or using your magic powers to help heal a character almost always makes this person feel included and also like participating in the night did not require math or mental strain, while still allowing them to make in-game comments and "be part" of the story. 
- **Silent Protaganist.** This person is sort of maintaining their status in the group by showing up, and they're probably on their phone as you recall this line in your head. They are not interested in playing dnd. In combat, they are confused. In roleplay, they are detached. In travel, they are silent. They will give you short, one-sentence replies with barely any real answer. Don't make them play. Let them sit there, silently following the party. The best relegation is essentially a beast of burden, using their strength only for carrying everyone else's shit. When they have to make rolls, make them easy. Don't make them lift a finger for it. Just let them through on mundane stuff until they start doing engaged things in the game. They are here to drink beer and be on their phone, just don't invite them next time if its bad enough. 
- **The Umm-I.** The most anxious out of all the most common first time players is the Umm-I, the thematic opposite of the Silent Protaganist, is engaged in the game, and they want to know how it works, but they get so wrapped up in being involved that they are essentially bombing a social interaction with their friends. They should be easy to spot, they say their name a lot. They have the ability to DESTROY a game if they are given the microphone for too long, so I find it best to over-explain what dice rolls are going to accomplish during a roll so they feel informed, and to also pretty much let them slide during roleplay conversation. Unlike the `Mystery Princess`, they should make a roll that will show how they did in the conversation after speaking, giving them extra points when they say something witty or that the character wants to hear.
- **Strategist - Routes.** This guy will spend 30 minutes hyperanalyzing any sort of map you give them. They will spend a lot of time trying to make sure the characters go down the least (or most) dangerous path on their way to wherever they go. The easiest thing to do is to sort the paths up into basic A and B options, and make one clearly more dangerous to travellers than the other, bonus points for another path that is extremely easy to get lost in, which the `Routes Strategist` HATES, but finds engaging, like a dog treat that's difficult to operate. They are relatively harmless as long as you give them a secondary location to attempt to reach. They may beg you to draw a map if you have none. 
- **Strategist - Logistics.** This is another of the players you want one of in the party. If there's one person who is anal about their inventory, and keeps track of every arrow they fire, then it's an added layer of gameplay for free (one that I often choose to aschew). Like the Loyalist, it's dangerous to have too many. This is essentially a young `Grognard`, but they want to actually have fun with you. Sometimes, it's just time to go back for some rations, and if the `Logistics Strategist` is out, then everyone else is, too. The easiest way to battle someone who is too into their inventory (where it's taking away from gameplay), then give them an extra layer: **bulk**. Usually, weight is all I use, but you can also say that something is too bulky to take with them in a pack, limiting the number of items they can bring, and thus keep track of. 
- **Strategist - General.**
- **Rules Lawyer.**
- **Min-Maxxer.**
- **The Referee.** This is one of the most dangerous players because they will attempt to muscle you into believing you are wrong about the rules of the game and that you should play the "correct way". The most effective defence for these people is different from the `Rules Lawyer` because they are aware of the more complex thematic systems at play. They know what you *want*, and how to muscle you into giving it to them for free. Sometimes, you just have to tell them no. 
- **Leash Kid.** This is like the `Routes Strategist`, but we need no second location, no route, no real map. If they walk into "a clearing", they will start poking around under rocks and in caves. Nowhere is a leash kid more dangerous than in a place you can get lost, and it's important to teach them that. A lot of the time, I can waste the in-game day completely on getting them lost, and this is a good lesson. If a leash kid leads them into a forest, let them go, and let them wander back onto the path, hungry and tired, still having to walk back into town. Nobody will be happy but EVERYONE will feel like they played D&D, and the leash kid should be harmless after that. Extra points if there is a time crunch on them for any reason. 

### 2a. Understanding Risk

## 3. Knowing the Game

## 4. Playtypes & Gathering Materials
